# Lecture: Expressions

## Assigned Reading

- _[The Coder’s Apprentice](https://www.spronck.net/pythonbook/pythonbook.pdf)_
  - Chapter 3 - Expressions

## Topics

- Variables
- Basic input
- String expressions
- Data types
- Arithmetic expressions

## Review

Use the `print()` function to display things to the output console.

- You can print strings (surrounded by double quotes): `print("Hello, world!")`
- You can print numbers (no quotes): `print(2)`
- You can print the result of an expression: `print(2 * 10)`

## Variables

A computer has memory. This is not like your SSD or hard drive or flash drive or memory card. A computer has a "main memory", also known as RAM. Computer programs use this for temporary storage while the program runs.

Programming languages make it easy to assign a label to some portion of computer memory. Your program can then store data in that location and retrieve it back whenever needed.

Example creating a variable:

```python
x = 5
print(x)
```

In Python, you can create a variable anywhere. Write the name for your variable, then an equal sign, then the value you want to store in that variable.

```python
name = "Bob"
print(name)
```

You can store the result of expressions into a variable:

```python
sum = 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
print(sum)
```

You can use variables as part of expressions:

```python
width = 10
height = 20
print("Area =", width * height)
```

We'll look more at variables later.

## Basic Input

When you run your program, you interact with it using a console window (also known as a terminal or shell).

Python lets you output text to the console window with `print()`.

Python also lets you read _input_ from the console with `input()`.

Try it:

```python
name = input("Enter your name: ")
print("Hello ", name)
```

Breakdown:

- The `input()` function outputs a prompt message to the console.
- It waits for the user to type something and press the enter key.
- It copies whatever the user typed and stores it in the `name` variable.

## Exercise

Do the "Basic Input" exercise.

You can do this exercise with a partner. You must both submit a solution, but you can come up with the solution together.

## String Expressions

You can add strings together. This is not arithmetic. It is string _concatenation_. It joins two strings together.

```python
print("hello" + "world")
```

Pay attention to the spacing (or lack thereof) in the resulting string.

```python
first = "George"
last = "Washington"
print(first + " " + last)
```

## Arithmetic Expressions

Arithmetic calculations can be performed as expected.

```
+  addition
-  subtraction
*  multiplication
/  division
// integer division (rounds result to nearest whole number)
** power
%  modulo (the remainder of division)
```

You should get comfortable with the modulo operator, as it will show up multiple times in this course.

```python
quotient = 17 // 3
remainder = 17 % 3
print("Quotient:", quotient)
print("Remainder:", remainder)
```

They follow the normal mathematical order of operations.

- Parentheses
- Exponents
- Multiplication and division
- Addition and subtraction

```python
print(5 * 2 - 3 + 4 / 2)
```

Reminder that spaces don't matter here:

```python
print(5 *      2 - 3        + 4  /     2)
```

Use parenthesis to control order of operations:

```python
print(5 * (2 - 3) + 4 / 2)
```

## Data Types

There are different types of data you can deal with in Python. We'll mention three here.

- Strings: a sequence of characters. Example: `"Hello, world!"`
- Integers: a whole number. Example: `24`
- Floating-point numbers: a number that can be fractional (has a decimal point). Example: `24.25`

You can convert data between types if you need to.

- `int()` - convert a value to an integer (rounds down)
- `float()` - converts a value to a float
- `str()` - converts a value to a string

Example:

```python
print(15 / 4)
print(int(15 / 4))
```

Another example:

```python
print(15 + 4)
print(float(15 + 4))
```

Another example (try this without the `str()` to see what happens):

```python
print("I own " + str(15) + " apples.")
```

Consider what happens when getting user input:

```python
unitPrice = 2.95
num = input("Enter quantity purchased: ")
print("Total cost:", num * unitPrice)
```

This code fails at runtime because `num` is a string.

Instead, convert the value to an integer:

```python
unitPrice = 2.95
num = input("Enter quantity purchased: ")
print("Total cost:", int(num) * unitPrice)
```

What happens if you type a character instead of a digit? We'll look at how to make this more robust later.

## Comments

A comment is ignored by the compiler/interpreter. It is not executed.

```python
print("Hello") # This is a comment

#print("Nope")
# print("Also nope")

# Also a comment
print("world!")
```

You can use comments to make notes about the _meaning_ of code, or the reason for the code's existence, or justification for odd or confusing or non-standard code.

Writing good code includes communicating with others and your future self about the meaning and purpose of any source code. Even if you are the developer who will ever see the code, you will forget about what you wrote in a short amount of time. Comments can help remind you why you did something a certain way.

## Homework

Complete the remaining exercises. You must do these on your own.

**Commit and push to GitHub.**

Ensure the automated tests pass.

## Review Questions

1. What is output (i.e., what is displayed) by the following code?

   ```python
   print("Welcome to", "Evangel", "   University   " + "!")
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   result = 4 + 2 * 10 / 5 - 1
   print(result)
   ```

1. What is output by the following code? (Pay attention to whitespace!)

   ```python
   age = input("Enter your age: ")
   age = int(age)
   print("You are", age, "years old.")
   ```

1. What is output by the following code? (Pay attention to whitespace!)

   ```python
   age = input("Enter your age: ")
   print("You are" + age + "years old.")
   ```

1. Consider the following code:

   ```python
   age = input("Enter your age: ")
   print("Twice your age is:", age * 2)
   ```

   - What is wrong with this code?
   - How would you fix it?
   - (Note: this is a tricky one; run the code to help see what's wrong!)
