# Lecture: Variables

## Assigned Reading

- _[The Coder’s Apprentice](https://www.spronck.net/pythonbook/pythonbook.pdf)_
  - Chapter 4 - Variables

## Topics

- Variables
- Assignments
- Variable names
- Data types and type casting
- Constants
- Errors

## Creating Variables

Last lecture we introduced variables. Let's review and then discuss them in more detail.

Variables are temporary storage locations used by programs. They allow you to store and retrieve temporary data from the computer's main memory.

Example creating a variable:

```python
x = 5
print(x)
```

In Python, you can create a variable anywhere. Write the name for your variable, then an equal sign, then the value you want to store in that variable.

```python
name = "Bob"
print(name)
```

You can update a variable after you create it:

```python
x = 5
print(x)
x = 7 * 9 + 13 # overwrite the previous value of x
print(x)
```

Python let's you change what type of data is stored in the variable (some programming languages do not).

```python
x = 5
print(x)
x = "A wink's as good as a nod to a blind mule."
print(x)
x = int(15 / 4) - 27
print(x)
```

## Using Variables

Suppose you purchase 60 books, each cost $24.95 per book. You could compute the cost:

```python
print(60 * 24.95)
```

You could store that cost in a variable:

```python
cost = 60 * 24.95
print(cost)
```

This is a fixed, hard-coded computation. What if you don't know how many books you are going to buy up front?

```python
numBooks = 60
costPerBook = 24.95
print(numBooks * costPerBook)
```

The `print()` function can accept multiple arguments:

```python
numBooks = 60
costPerBook = 24.95
print("Number of books:", numBooks)
print("Cost per book:", costPerBook)
print("Total cost:", numBooks * costPerBook)
```

You can copy the value stored in one variable into another variable.

```python
first = 100
second = "Hello there!"
third = first
first = second

print(first, second, third)
```

Be warned: you can't use a variable before it's been created!

```python
print(name) # Error - name hasn't been created yet!
name = "Bob"
```

## Exercise

Do the "Swapping Variables" exercise.

You can do this exercise with a partner. You must both submit a solution, but you can come up with the solution together.

## Variable Names

### Rules

Rules for variable names:

- Allowed: letters, digits, underscores (`_`)
- Must start with letter or underscore
- Cannot be a reserved keyword (see p. 27 of textbook)

Which of the following variables are invalid? Run the code below and observe the errors. Comment out lines that have invalid variable names.

```python
classification = 1 # 1
Classification = 1 # 2
cl@ssification = 1 # 3
class1f1cat10n = 1 # 4
1classification = 1 # 5
_classification = 1 # 6
class = 1 # 7
Class = 1 # 8
```

Important note: variable names are case sensitive!

```python
x = 1
X = 2
print(x, X)

name = "Bob"
Name = "Alice"
print(name, Name)
```

### Picking Variable Names

There's an old saying that goes like this:

> There are two hard things in computer science:
>
> 1. Naming things
> 2. Cache invalidation
> 3. Off-by-one errors

Picking a name for variables can be tricky. You need something that communicates to other developers what a the purpose of a variable is. What data does it hold?

What does the following code do?

```python
a = 1
b = 3
c = a * b
```

If we give the variables better names, does the code make more sense?

```python
width = 1
height = 3
area = width * height
```

(See also example from text, pp. 28-29.)

Another example:

```python
water = nt * gph * h
```

Versus:

```python
totalGallons = numTanks * galPerHour * hours
```

Single-letter names or two-letter names aren't necessarily bad (sometimes perfectly acceptable). It depends on the context.

Of course, you can go overboard. A really long variable name may not be needed.

```python
# Probably overkill
firstNameOfPersonTypedIntoKeyboard = "Alice"

# Gets the point across
firstName = "Alice"
```

Choosing variable names can sometimes be an art and is a skill you get better at as you go along.

**Main point**: when writing computer code, make sure your intentions are clear.

- Does the variable name help tell the story of what data is stored in that variable?
- Can someone else understand your code?
- Will you understand your code when you look at it in the future?

## Constants

The value of a variable can change over time. It can _vary_. Hence the name _variable_.

Some languages allow you to create **constants**. A constant can be assigned a value, but cannot change after the fact. It is _constant_.

Python does not have this 😢.

One convention you can use is to name variables you want to treat like constants using all upper case letters.

Consider this program (see p. 30 from the text):

```python
SERVICE_CHARGE = 1.15
CENTS = 100

total = 24.95
final_total = int(CENTS * total * SERVICE_CHARGE) / CENTS
print(final_total)
```

The variables `SERVICE_CHARGE` and `CENTS` have named with uppercase letters to tell other developers these should not change.

This is a _convention_. A convention is not enforced by the language. It is something developers working on the same project have to know and follow on their own.

## Data Types Revisited

### Dynamic vs Static Typing

Programming languages can be either **dynamically** or **statically** typed. This refers to how the data types of variables are handled.

Python uses **dynamic typing**.

A variable in Python can hold whatever type of data you want. You can change the type of data stored in a variable after it is created.

Look at the following Python code. What do you think will be output?

```python
a = 3
print(type(a))
a = 3.0
print(type(a))
a = "3.0"
print(type(a))
```

The C programming language uses **static typing**. You must declare what type of data will be stored in the variable. The compiler will only let you update the variable with that type of data.

The following C code would fail to compile:

```c
int a = 3;
a = 3.0f;
a = "3.0";
```

### Strong vs Weak Typing

Python has certain rules about how variables are used in different operations.

For example, you can add two numbers together:

```python
num1 = 5
num2 = 10
print(num1 + num2)
```

You can add two strings together:

```python
str1 = "Hello, "
str2 = "world!"
print(str1 + str2)
```

But you can't add a number and a string:

```python
num1 = 5
str1 = "Hello"
print(num1 + str1)
```

Instead, you have to explicitly tell Python to convert the number to a string (or vice versa):

```python
num1 = 5
str1 = "Hello"
print(str(num1) + str1)
```

This is referred to as **strong typing**. The definitions of strong typing and weak typing can vary depending on who you ask. How a language is categorized even seems to vary. We won't worry about such definitions in this course.

## Shorthand Operators

Compare this code:

```python
number_of_bananas = 100
number_of_bananas = number_of_bananas + 1
print(number_of_bananas)
```

with this code:

```python
number_of_bananas = 100
number_of_bananas += 1
print(number_of_bananas)
```

Notice the difference?

Other examples from the text:

```python
number_of_bananas = 100
number_of_bananas += 12
number_of_bananas -= 13
number_of_bananas *= 19
number_of_bananas /= number_of_bananas
print(number_of_bananas)
```

## Errors

Sometimes your code is bad and things go wrong 😢. Sometimes your code is fine and things still go wrong 😭.

There are three categories of errors:

**Syntax errors** (or compilation errors) - the compiler/interpreter fails because your code is written improperly. It doesn't follow the syntax rules of the language.

Here is a syntax error in Python:

```python
print(blah blah blah)
```

**Logic errors** - your program compiles and runs file, but the output is not what you expect.

Here is a logic error:

```python
width = 20
height = 10
print("Area: ", width * width)
```

**Runtime errors** - your program compiles and runs, but at some point it crashes (for various possible reasons, maybe your program ran out of memory).

## Homework

Complete the remaining exercises. You must do these on your own.

**Commit and push to GitHub.**

Ensure the automated tests pass.

## Review Questions

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   x = 10
   x = x * 2
   x = x + 2
   print(x)
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   x = 10
   x += 2
   x *= 2
   print(x)
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   x = 10
   x -= 2
   x *= 3
   x = 14
   print(x)
   ```

1. The following code has a syntax error. What is the problem? (Look closely!)

   ```python
   numleft = 20
   print("Number remaining:", numLeft)
   ```

1. What type of data is stored in the `val` variable in the code below (int, float, or string)?

   ```python
   val = 2415
   ```

1. What type of data is stored in the `val` variable in the code below (int, float, or string)?

   ```python
   val = "2415"
   ```

1. What type of data is stored in the `val` variable in the code below (int, float, or string)?

   ```python
   val = "53.1234"
   ```

1. What type of data is stored in the `val` variable in the code below (int, float, or string)?

   ```python
   val = 53.1234
   ```

1. The code below has an error. Is it a logic error or syntax error? Explain how to fix the error.

   ```python
   # Compute the perimeter of a square
   sideLength = 50
   perimeter = sideLength * 2
   print("Perimeter:", perimeter)
   ```

1. What are the values of `x` and `y` after the follow code executes?

   ```python
   x = 19
   y = 9
   y = x % y
   ```
