# Lecture: Simple Functions

## Assigned Reading

- _[The Coder’s Apprentice](https://www.spronck.net/pythonbook/pythonbook.pdf)_
  - Chapter 5 - Simple Functions
    - 5.1 - Elements of a function
    - 5.2.2 - Calculations
    - 5.2.3 - `len()`
    - 5.3 - Modules

## Topics

- Functions
- Parameters
- Return values
- Built-in functions
- `pcinput` module

## Functions Review

### Examples

We've talked about functions previously. Let's review.

```python
print("Hello, world!")
```

`print()` is a function. It prints characters to the console output.

A function is a reusable block of code. You use a function by _calling_ the function.

Functions provide **abstraction**. You don't have to know the details of how a function works to use it. The `print()` function certainly does a lot for us, yet we don't know precisely what all is involved.

Here's another function we've seen:

```python
num = int("2")
```

`int()` is a function. It converts a string into an integer.

### Parameters

Functions can accept parameters (also called arguments; we'll use the terms interchangeably). Some functions accept no arguments. Some accept multiple.

The `print()` function can take zero or more arguments, separated by commas. We've already seen examples of this:

```python
print("Hello", "world", 1, "-", 2)
```

Calling `print()` with no arguments results in a blank line:

```python
print("Hello")
print()
print("how are", "you doing?")
```

The `int()` function can take 0 or 1 parameters.

```python
num = int("2")
print(num)
num = int()
print(num)
```

If you try to pass a function incompatible parameters, it will most likely lead to a runtime error (exception):

```python
num = int("2", "3", "4")
print(num)
```

### Return Values

A function can return a value back to whoever called it. Some functions return values, others do not.

The `print()` function does not return any value.

```python
print("Hello, world!")
```

You call the function, it executes its code, and the program continues to the next line.

The `int()` function does return a value. It returns an integer.

```python
num = int("23")
```

You call the function, it executes its code, and then it returns an integer that your program can use (in the example above, the return value is stored in the `num` variable).

You can think of the return value as being substituted in place of the function call.

```python
print(int("3"))
```

Here's another example from the text:

```python
x = 2.1
y = '3'
z = int(x)
print(z)
print(int(y))
```

## Built-in Functions

If you want more details about a function, look at the [official documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html).

### Calculation Functions

Here are some built-in functions you can use to perform certain calculations:

- `abs()` - takes one numeric parameter, returns the absolute value.
- `max()` - takes two or more numeric parameters, returns the largest.
- `min()` - takes two or more numeric parameters, returns the smallest.
- `pow()` - takes two numeric parameters: `base` and `exp`. Returns `base` to the power `exp`.
- `round()` - takes a numeric parameter and rounds it. A second parameter is optional, and specifies how may decimal places to round to ([full details](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#round)).

Here is an example from the textbook:

```python
x = -2
y = 3
z = 1.27
print(abs(x))
print(max(x, y, z))
print(min(x, y, z))
print(pow(x, y))
print(round(z))
print(round(z, 1))
print(round(z, 2))
```

### `len()`

The `len()` function returns the length of the provided parameter.

```python
print(len("ABCDEFG"))
print(len(""))
```

The `len()` function can be used with other data types, not just strings. We'll see that later on in the course.

### `input()`

We've seen the `input()` function already. Here is a review.

- It prints a prompt message to the console output,
- waits for the user to type text and press the enter key,
- returns the string of text the user typed.

```python
name = input("Enter your name: ")
```

You should also already be aware that the `input()` function always returns a string. So if you want a number, you have to convert the string into the correct data type.

```python
number = input("Please enter a number: ")
number = float(number)
print("Your number squared is", number * number)
```

## Modules

Some functions are built-in. You can use them whenever.

Other functions are part of modules. A module is a collection of functions and related code.

Python provides some built-in modules. To use a module, you have to import it.

Let's look at the `math` module. You can see what functions are provided in the module [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/math.html).

```python
import math
```

After importing the module, you can use any of its functions:

```python
result = math.sqrt(99)
print(result)
```

You can also import just specific functions you want to use:

```python
from math import log2
print(log2(8))
```

You can import a function, but rename it for use within your source file:

```python
from math import log2 as calclog
print(calclog(8))
```

The `math` module also has constants that you can import, such as Pi:

```python
import math
print("Pi is:", math.pi)
```

## Input Handling

We mentioned the `input()` function always returns a string:

```python
number = input("Please enter a number: ")
number = float(number)
print("Your number squared is", number * number)
```

But what happens when you need the user to enter a number, but the user does not enter a valid set of digits? (Answer: the program crashes.)

Good programs must properly handle invalid user input.

The author of the textbook, Pieter Spronck, has provided a module with functions to help make this easier.

The module is named `pcinput`. The code can be found [here](https://www.spronck.net/pythonbook/). A copy of the module is included in the exercise repository for your convenience.

You can input a custom module similar to a built-in module:

```python
from pcinput import getInteger

num1 = getInteger("Please enter an integer: ")
num2 = getInteger("Please enter another integer: ")

print("The sum of", num1, "and", num2, "is", num1 + num2)
```

The functions available are:

- `getInteger()`
- `getFloat()`
- `getString()`
- `getLetter()`

They will keep prompting the user to input a value until they enter a valid input for that type of data. You can read more details in the textbook.

## Exercise

Do the "Seconds in a Day" exercise.

You can do this exercise with a partner. You must both submit a solution, but you can come up with the solution together.

## Homework

Complete the remaining exercises for this lecture. You must do these on your own.

**Commit and push to GitHub.**

Ensure the automated tests pass.

## Review Questions

1.  What is output by the following program?

    ```python
    x = 2
    y = 3
    print(pow(2, 3))
    ```

1.  What is output by the following program?

    ```python
    import math

    x = 16
    print(f"The square root of {x} is {math.sqrt(16)}.")
    ```

1.  What is output by the following program?

    ```python
    print(abs(-2.5))
    ```

1.  What is output by the following program?

    ```python
    print("Result: " + str(abs(-2.5)))
    ```

1.  What is output by the following program?

    ```python
    x = 10
    y = 12
    z = 8
    print("The largest is", max(x, y, z))
    print("The smallest is", min(x, y, z))
    ```
