# Lecture: Lists

## Assigned Reading

- _[The Coder’s Apprentice](https://www.spronck.net/pythonbook/pythonbook.pdf)_
  - Chapter 12 - Lists
    - 12.1 List basics
    - 12.2 Lists are mutable
    - 12.3 Lists and operators
    - 12.4 List methods
    - 12.6 Nested lists

## Topics

- Lists
- List iteration
- Nested lists

## Data Structures

So far, we have used variables in many ways. Variables store a value. Some piece of data. It could be a string, an integer, a floating-point number, etc. But so far we've only used variables that store a _single_ piece of data.

Sometimes the data we need to work with in a program is more complicated than a single value. To deal with different types of data, we use _data structures_. This is a generic term. It refers to different ways data can be arranged and manipulated by programming languages.

One example of a data structure is a list. We will talk about using lists in Python today.

## Lists

A list is an _ordered_ collection of items. This means the order of items in a list matters.

A list in Python is indicated using square brackets (`[]`). Items are separated by commas.

```python
values = [1, 3, 9, 12]
```

- This creates a list variable named `values`.
- This is a list of integers.
- There are 4 items in this list.

You can access items in the list via their _index_. This is similar to characters in a string.

- First item is at index 0.
- Second item is at index 1.
- etc...

```python
print(values[0])
print(values[1])
print(values[2])
print(values[3])
```

You can store any type of data in a list.

```python
print(['a', 'b', 'c'])
print(["Bob", "Alice", "Greg"])
print([1.2, 3.2, 4.1])
```

Unlike some other languages, you can store different types of data in the same list.

```python
l = ["Bob", 123, 9.2]
print(l)
print(type(l[0]))
print(type(l[1]))
print(type(l[2]))
```

## `for` and Lists

A `for` loop can iterate over items in a collection. A list is a collection. It works with `for` loops.

```python
numbers = [1, 2, 5, 3, 10, 7]
for num in numbers:
    print(num)
```

An alternate way of iterating through items in a list is using an index variable.

```python
numbers = [1, 2, 5, 3, 10, 7]
for i in range(0, len(numbers)):
    print(numbers[i])
```

- This is a very common method across different programming languages. This is similar to how we will iterate over arrays in the C language later on in the semester.

## Exercise

Create a list that has five strings. Then use a `for` loop to print out each of the items in the list.

Use both methods of iteration:

- `for x in list:`
- `for i in range(...):`

## Modifying a List

A list can be modified. In fact, there are a lot of things Python lets you do with a list. Let's look at some basic operations.

### `append()`

Adds an item to the end of the list. The length of the list increases by 1.

```python
l = [1, 5, 2]
l.append(4)
print(l)
```

### `insert()`

Inserts an item into the list at a specific index. Other items shift over to accommodate. The length of the list increases by 1.

```python
l = ["Alice", "Greg", "Bob"]
l.insert(1, "Nancy")  # Insert "Nancy" at index 1, between "Alice" and "Greg"
print(l)
```

### `remove()`

Removes an item _by value_. Searches through the list for the specified value. If found, it is removed from the list. If there are duplicates, only the first instance is removed. The length of the list is decreased by 1.

```python
l = ["Bob", "Greg", "Alice", "Greg"]
l.remove("Greg")
print(l)
```

### `pop()`

Removes an item _by index_. If you don't specify an index, the default is to remove the item at the end of the list. You can override this and specify a specific index to remove. The length of the list is decreased by 1.

```python
l = ["Bob", "Greg", "Alice", "Greg"]
last = l.pop()
print(last)
print(l)
```

### `sort()`

Sorts the items in a list from high to low (descending).

```python
l = ["Bob", "Greg", "Alice", "Nancy"]
print(l)
l.sort()
print(l)
```

If you want to sort in reverse order (ascending):

```python
l = ["Bob", "Greg", "Alice", "Nancy"]
print(l)
l.sort(reverse=True)
print(l)
```

Works with numbers too. There are ways to do custom sorting (we won't discuss right now, but you can look it up).

(Note: _ordered_ and _sorted_ are two different terms.)

### `reverse()`

Reverses the order of the items in the list.

```python
l = ["Bob", "Greg", "Alice", "Nancy"]
print(l)
l.reverse()
print(l)
```

### Empty Lists

You can create an empty list, then modify it later:

```python
l = [] # Empty list
```

## Nested Lists

You can put whatever you want in a list - even another list (list inception!)!

```python
my_list = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]
```

- The list `my_list` is a list variable.
- That list contains two items.
- Each item is a list.

```python
print(my_list[0])
print(my_list[1])
```

## Exercise

Do the "Roster" exercise.

You can do this exercise with a partner. You must both submit a solution, but you can come up with the solution together.

## Homework

Complete the remaining exercises for this lecture. You must do these on your own.

**Commit and push to GitHub.**

Ensure the automated tests pass.

## Review Questions

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   l = [1, 3, 5]
   for item in l:
       print(item, end='')
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   l = [1, 3, 5]
   print(l[1])
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   l = [[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6]]
   print(l[0][1])
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   names = ["Ralph", "Alice", "Ed"]
   names.sort()
   print(names[len(names) - 1])
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   names = []
   names.append("Ralph")
   names.insert(0, "Alice")
   names.append("Ed")
   print(names)
   ```

1. What is output by the following code?

   ```python
   names = []
   names.append("Ralph")
   names.insert(0, "Alice")
   names.append("Ed")
   print(names.pop(1))
   ```
